---
layout: post
title:  "Basics of Game Theory"
date:   2020-01-27
desc: "How game theory works in simple terms"
keywords: ""
categories: [HTML]
tags: [Jalpc,Jekyll]
icon: icon-html
---

Game theory, a very fancy name was first devised by John Von Neumann. Later contributions were made by John Nash, A. W. Tucker, and others.

**Why Game Theory? Can we not use the theory of maximization to analyze a strategic situation?

Definition:

Game theory is the mathematical modeling of strategic (strategy indicates an action that a player takes when challenged to solve a particular problem) interaction among rational (act in a way to maximize your expected utility or profits) players. 
In much simpler words, it gives a unified answer to what people might behave in any social situation, given that they are perfectly rational and everyone is doing their best. Beyond what we call `games' in common language, such as chess, poker, soccer, etc., it includes the modeling of conflict among nations, political campaigns, competition among firms, and trading behavior in financial markets.

Hence, we need this additional theory to analyze how one player anticipates the other player's behavior.

Applications: 

At any time if we have a situation with two or more players that involve known pay-outs or quantifiable consequences, we can use game theory to help determine the most likely outcomes. Widely applicable in any situation where there’s competition and strategic interaction. 
Has applications in Finance, Economics, Computer Science, psychology, mathematics, political science, etc.

Examples: 

A business application can be to obtain insights regarding the competition and the overall competitive landscape of the business and the industry. This theory addresses the question “what are my rivals or opponents thinking?” to know what their competition’s next move is – their motivations, their strategies, their strengths, and their weaknesses, and use all these information to change the game and increase the value of their own business proposition

Branches:

Can we convert any problem to a game and use game theory? Yes, if we define players, actions/strategies and payoffs/utility functions.

Players: who participates in the problem
Action/strategy: what each player does in the problem i.e. they take some action or strategy
Payoff: what motivates the players, do they care about profits?


Out of many types of Game theories, the two most common branches with their solutions:

1. Co-operative game theory: Refers to the games in which a mechanism is available that can enforce agreements between players and they can benefit by cooperating. i.e. “players can negotiate binding contracts that allow them to plan and implement joint strategies”. Actions are taken by groups of players, coalitions, and payoffs are given to the group, which has to be divided among its members.
Based on sharing profit or utility, cooperative games are divided as transferable and non-transferable utility games.

a.)Transferable utility games: Defined as participants negotiate about sharing a given commodity (such as money or political power) which is fully transferable between players and evaluated in the same way by everyone. 
i.e. payoffs are not given to individual players and only given for coalitions. And these payoffs to a coalition can be freely redistributed among its members in an unambiguous manner resulting in same total utility among all members of the coalition.


b.)Non-transferable utility games: When each coalition has the ability to achieve a set of outcomes, the players here have a preference relation over the outcomes. 
Examples include when a set of continuous goods are exchanged, the players have preferec over the bundle of goods and tries to obtain the best bundle possible.

2. Non-cooperative game theory: Refers to models in which each player is assumed to behave selfishly given his/her conjectures or beliefs on how the other players are going to play and their behaviors are directly modeled. Players cannot make binding agreements. 
Non-cooperative games include rock-paper-scissor, a penalty kick in soccer, most business situations where there is competition for the payoff, etc.



**We will be discussing the practical applications and solution concepts of cooperative and non-cooperative game theory.
